GLASTONBURY TRADITIONS concerning JOSEPH OF ARIMATHEA (Translated from Ussher's ‘ Antiquities ' Ch. ii) I NOW Come to the traditions of the Monks of Glaston concerning Joseph of Arimathea and his companions: which, although I do not esteem them more ancient than the coming of the Normans and are plainly redolent of the superstition of later times, yet, of whatever quality they are, it seemed well to me to set them out from the book of William of Malmesbury on the " Antiquity of the Church of Glaston." Thus, then, with a preliminary preface to Henry of Blois- nephew to King Henry I, by his sister Adela-then Bishop of Winchester and Abbot of Glaston, he commences his archæology from Apostolic times. "After the glory of the Lord's resurrection, and the triumph of His ascension, and the sending of the Spirit, the Comforter from on high (who filled the disciples ' hearts till then trembling through fear of earthly punishment, by imparting to them a knowledge of all tongues ), all the believers were together with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, as Luke the Evangelist relates: and the Word of God was spread, and the number of the believers increased daily; and in all there was one heart and one mind. Then the priests of the Jews, with the Pharisees and Scribes, inflamed with the fires of envy, stirred up a persecution in the Church, by slaying the protomartyr, Stephan, and driving afar nearly all from their borders. "Whilst, therefore, this storm of persecution was raging, the scattered believers sought divers kingdoms of the earth, chosen by the Lord for Himself, in order to deliver the Word of Salvation to the nations. Now St. Philip, as Freculphus testifieth in his second book, Chapter IV, coming into the region of the Franks in order to preach, converted many to the faith and baptized them. Thereupon, purposing to spread Christ's Word, he chose twelve from among his disciples, and sent them into Britain to preach the Gospel of the Word of Life: over whom he placed in authority, it is said, his dearest friend, Joseph of Arimathea, who buried the Lord. "Coming therefore into Britain in the 63rd year from the Incarnation of the Lord, the 15th from the Assumption of the Blessed Mary, they preached with boldness the faith of Christ. But the barbarian king with his people, hearing such novel and unaccustomed things, absolutely refused to agree with their preaching, neither did he wish to change the traditions of his ancestors; yet, because they were come from far, and he observed the sobriety of their mode of life, he granted them a certain island, surrounded by woods, thickets and marshes, called by its inhabitants Ynswitrin, on the confines of his territories, in which to dwell. Moreover, afterwards, two other pagan kings observing their pious mode of life successively granted to each of them a portion of land; and at their request, confirmed to them by a writing (brevi) the said XII portions after the manner of the nation. Whence, as it is believed, the Twelve Hides take their name from them to this day. "And thus the said saints, dwelling together in this desert place, were in a very short time inspired by a vision of the Archangel Gabriel to build a church in honour of the Holy Mother of God and Virgin Mary in a place divinely revealed to them, who quick to obey the Divine precepts, completed a certain chapel according to what had been shewn them, fashioning its walls below, throughout its circumference, of twisted wattles, in the XXXIst year after the Passion of the Lord, and the XVth after the a literis. Assumption of the Glorious Virgin, rude, it is true, in form, but richly adorned with the power of God. "And as this was the first in that region, the Son of God distinguished it with greater dignity by dedicating it in honour of His Mother. "Thereupon the XII saints-so frequently mentioned, paying devout homage in that same spot to God and the Blessed Virgin; devoting themselves to vigils, fasts, and prayers, were constantly sustained ( as it is pious to believe ) in all their needs by the same Virgin's help and presence. "That these things are so we learn both from the Charter of the Blessed Patrick and from the Writings ofthe Elders." Later, Malmesbury adds, inproof of the antiquity of the Church ofGlaston, the following evidence also: "In the time of Henry of Blois, Abbot of Glastonia, acertain monk of Glastonia, Godefride by name (from whose epistle we have taken this extract ),when he was staying atSt. Denys, inthe district of Paris; acertain Elder of the monks enquired of him: of what race he was, and where he dwelt? He replied, aNorman, amonk of amonastery inBritain called Glastingeia. How strange,' said he, ΙΟ 'doth that most ancient church of the Perpetual Virgin and Mother of Mercy still endure?' 'It doth,' replied he. Thereupon he, with gentle touch caressing the head of Godefride of Glaston, kept silence for a long while and at length broke forth thus: "This Church of the most glorious Martyr Denys, and that of which thou speakest, possess the same dignity of privilege: this in Gaul, that in Britain, founded at one and the same time and consecrated by the Most High and Mighty Pontiff. Nevertheless, in one respect that one is supereminent: since it is called Rome the Second '." Caesar Baronius quotes from the Acts of Mary Magdalene and her Companions on the dispersion after the death of Stephan: "That Lazarus, Mary Magdalene, Martha and Marcella, their attendant, against whom the Jews displayed the greater hatred, were not only driven from Jerusalem but, in company with Maximinus the disciple, were put into a boat without oars and were consigned to the sure peril of the sea: who by divine providence, they say, reached Marseilles." b Baron. Annal., tom 1., ann. 35, sec. 5., Vid. Petrum de Natalibus, lib. 6., cap. 124. Melchiorem Inchofer, de veritate Epistolae B. Mariae and Messanenses., cap. 13; et Fran. Bosquet., Eccles Gallican. hist., lib. 1., sec. 3. II And he adds from the " History of England, ” which MS. is preserved in the Vatican Library, but (of which he says nothing, and we in his stead shall disclose ) written in our times, "that their companion in this crisis was Joseph of Arimathea, the noble decurion, who, they relate, sailed out of Gaul into Britain and, thereafter, preaching the gospel, ended his days." In the "Chronicle of Pseudo -Dexter," also, we similarly read that in the year of Christ 48: "The Jews of Jerusalem being violently hostile to the Blessed Lazarus, Magdalene, Martha, Marcella, Maximin, Joseph of Arimathea, the noble decurion, and many others, put them in a ship without oars or sails and without a rudder and ordered them to live in banishment: who, being divinely carried by the mighty ocean, reached the port of Marseilles uninjured.” And in a fragment attributed to Heleca: "It is said that Magdalene, the sister of Lazarus, with Lazarus, Maximus and Chelidonius, Marcella and Joseph of Arimathea, came into Aquitanian Gaul and there preached the Holy Gospel of the Lord Jesus, as the histories of Gaul clearly teach and is the generally accepted tradition of that region." Moreover, that which Freculphus -cited by Malmesbury -holds concerning the apostleship of Philip in Gaul is expressed word for word in the book of Isidore concerning the Fathers of each Testament. C For in each we read that Philip preached Christ to the Gauls,"and that he led nations, barbarous and near to darkness and bordering on the swelling ocean, to the light of knowledge and to the gate of faith." I am not at all satisfied here with the conjecture of Baroniusd in transferring the statements of Isidore from our Gauls to the Galatians of Asia; much less with the temerity of a recent editor of the works of Isidore, Jacobus Breulius, in substituting Galatians for Gauls in the text itself without any reference to the ancient reading. For, besides, Isidore in this very work in the 82nd Chapter and in the Liturgy (officio ) of Toledo, which is commonly called Gothic and Mozarabic; also Julian Archbishop of Toledo writing on the Prophet Nahum, ' and Bede (or whoever was the author of the "Collections and Flowers " placed at the foot of the 3rd tome of his works), assign Gaul to Philip. c Vid., cap. 74. d Baron., tom. 1., ann. 44., sec. 32, et eum secutus, Jacobus Valdesius, de dignitate reg. Hisp., Cap. 6., sec. 56. e Offic. Mozar. in festo S. Jac., Tomo 2, Auctarii bibliother patrum, edit. Paris, ann. 1610, col. 1659, in Hymno de S. Jacobo quem inde desumptum commentario suo in Dextri chronicon inseruit Franc. Bivarius, p. 86. f ibid., col. 205. And the same man is said "To have preached Christ to the Gauls " in the book on the "Feasts of the Apostles ": which is found in the MS. "Martyrology of Hieronymus," from which Isidore transcribed nearly everything into his book on the Fathers of the New Testament; this mention of the barbarian nations adjacent to the Ocean sufficiently shews that they were European Gauls and not the Gallo -Greeks claimed by Isidore. Now, as for Philip having used the aid of Joseph of Arimathea in bringing the people of Britain to the faith, this is to be drawn from the wells of knowledge (lacunis) of the Monks of Glaston from which indeed have originated these rude verses quoted out of certain chronicles concerning King Arviragus: "There enters Avallonia a band of twelve men; Of these the flower and chief is Joseph of Arimathea. Josephes the son of Joseph accompanies his Father: To them and to the other ten the freedom of Glaston is granted." And these from others of equal grace: ¤ Joh. Capgrav. in vita Josephi, Tabula Magna, Glastoniensis. h Ex appendice Chronici Glastoniensis MS. in bibliotheca Cottoniana. "Philip ordered Joseph to cross with his companions. To the land of Britain to preach the divine Word. His garment bears those who held the promise: The others soon afterwards brought their ship to land. Joseph then counselled the King to believe in Christ: King Arviragus refused this, nor did he believe in Him. Arviragus the King gave him twice six hides at Glastonia: Joseph left the rights with those companions In the xxxi year after the Passion of Christ, These men, with praises, built a Church of Wattles." Even to -day there is to be seen at Wells, in the house of D. Thomas Hugo of the Order of Knighthood, a bronze tablet, formerly affixed to a column of the Church of Glaston; of which the inscription reads: "In the year XXXI, after the Lord's Passion, twelve holy men, of whom Joseph of Arimathea was the chief, came hither and built the i Habetur ineptissima haec fabella in magna Glastoniensis Ecclesiae tabula, et apud Capgravium in vita Josephi. Is first Church of this Kingdom, in this place which Christ at that time dedicated to the honour of His Mother and as a place for their burial." Furthermore, there is in the possession of the Most Noble D. William Howard, son of Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, a remarkable tablet comprising the antiquities of Glaston, collected from all quarters, inwhich, among other very fabulous matters, we read also the following: "Joseph of Arimathea attached himself tothe disciples of the Blessed Apostle Philip and was abundantly filled with his wholesome doctrine, and,with his son Joseph, baptized by him. "Afterwards, moreover, he was appointed by the Blessed Apostle John, toiling exclusively for the instruction of the Ephesians, asattendant (paranymphus ) ofthe Blessed and Perpetual Virgin Mary: and was also, with the Blessed Philip and the other disciples, present atthe Assumption of the Glorious and Adorable Virgin and, constantly preaching through divers regions those things which he had heard and seen touching both the Lord Jesus Christ and His Glorious Mother Mary, converting and baptizing many, he came atlength inthe XVth year after that glorious Assumption, with his aforementioned son Joseph toSaint Philip inGaul. And thereafter, according to what is read in the Book which is called 'Graal,' Joseph of Arimathea who buried the Lord, baptized by the Blessed Apostle Philip came into Greater Britain, promised to him and to his seed, together with his wife and his son, Joseph by name, whom the Saviour Himself had previously consecrated to be bishop in the fellowship of Saraz (in civitate Saraz ).” Next follow those wonderful stories in the life of Joseph which Capgrave relates in his most frivolous book, which is called the " Holy Graal,' of which the author seems to have been a little later than William of Malmesbury: although it is referred by Helinandus Cluniacensis, a monk of Mons Frigidus in Gaul to the year of grace DCCXX. For thus he writes in the Chronicle, quoted by Vincentius Bellovacensis: < "At this time," he says, " in Britain a certain marvellous vision was shewn by an Angel to a certain hermit, concerning the holy Joseph, the noble Decurion, who took down the body of the Lord from the Cross, and concerning the vessel or dish out of which the Lord supped with His disciples, of which a history was written by this same hermit, and is called ' Concerning the Gradalis.' Now, the Graal, or in Gallic Gradale, is said to be a salver, broad and somewhat deep, in which the costly feast together with the appointed condiments is wont to be placed before the rich, one morsel after another in different layers: and it is called by the common name of Graal, because it is pleasing and acceptable to him eating therefrom; as well on account of the container, which is perhaps of silver or some other precious metal, as of the contents, that is the manifold variety of the precious feast. I have not been able to find this history written in Latin; but, written in Gallic only, it is possessed by certain nobles, nor, so they say, can it easily be found. " Now, from thence, Thomas Malory has transferred many things into the fabled “Acts of King Arthur," put forth by him in the English tongue: who here makes use of the word ' Sangreal,' very closely approximating to the idea of the True Blood; indeed, he represents a portion of the most precious blood of our Saviour to be here preserved: either shed on the Cross, or reserved at the Last Supper of Christ: concerning which Stephanus Forcatulus (writes ): m "The Britons record that Joseph brought with him a pledge and witness of that sacred supper: to wit, a vessel appointed to the service of the most holy guests, for a very long time held in great reverence, as it were a kind of 989. 1 Hist. Anglic. Arthuri, a Molorio edit., lib. 11, cap. ult. pledge of the security of Britain: not unlike the Trojan Palladium. 99 Thus he (writes ), also adding later a statement concerning British magic which was even increased by the aged Joseph, remote no less from reason than from religion: "Joseph of Arimathea, a welcome stranger to Britain, who had drawn his art from the spring of Solomon, introduced " strange rites. For this wise king divinely imbued with the hidden Wisdom, composed incantations by which sicknesses might be banished and demons put to flight, never to return." Of the twelve disciples sent by the Blessed Philip into Britain, a certain monk of Malmesbury, in the second book of his "Eulogy," makes mention in this manner: "In the LXIII year from the Lord's Incarnation and the XV from the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary twelve disciples came into Greater Britain sent thither by the Blessed Apostle Philip to preach the word of God: of whom the chief was Joseph of Arimathea who buried Jesus Christ. On whom the King Arviragus, although a pagan, in order that they might toil no longer, conferred XII hides of land in the Isle of Avalon which is now called Glastonia. n Id., ibid; pag. 1002. Vid. Jacob Valdesium, de dignitate Hispaniae, Cap. 16, sec. 12. Ex Josepho, lib. 8, Antiquit. Judaic, cap, 2, In which place they constructed a church in honour of the Blessed Virgin. by direction of the Holy Archangel Michael, making the walls of twisted wattles." In the " Chronicle of Glaston," also, entered in the year MCCLIX, we find written: "In the year LXIII from the Incarnation, disciples of the Holy Apostles Philip and James came into Britain: by whom the first oratory was built in the Isle of Avalon in honour of S. Mary, in the XV year after her Assumption." And in another, " written by a monk of the community of S. Augustine of Canterbury in the year MCCCCVI: "King Yna was the first founder of the Monastery of Glaston. Nevertheless the monks there allege another foundation by King Arviragus (son of Kimbeline, King of the Britons, in whose time Christ Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary) and which was endowed with numerous possessions by King Arthur." Also in a Book of the " Prerogatives and Dignities," concerning the monastic Order, which is thought to be written by Thomas Walsingham: "S. Philip, the Apostle of Jesus Christ, sent XII preachers into Britain, of whom the first and chiefest was Joseph of Arimathea who buried P MS. in bibliotheca Cottoniana. 9 MS. M. Roberti Haraei. Christ. Who, coming to Glastonia, received possession of xii hides from Arviragus, the noble King of Britain, though still steeped in pagan errors. These by the admonition of the Archangel Gabriel, built a Church in honour of the Holy Mary Mother of God in the xxxi year after the Lord's Passion." John Tinmuth thus narrates the matter from the books of the Monastery of Glaston: "After that the Apostles had dispersed into divers regions in order to preach the Word of Life, the Holy Apostle Philip, with his disciples, was allotted the region of the Franks: of whom he sent xii into Britain (Joseph of Arimathea who buried the Lord being the chief) in the sixtythird year from the Lord's Incarnation, and the fifteenth from the Assumption of S. Mary; to whom were granted xii hides by Arviragus though blinded by pagan errors. There, serving God, they erected by direction of the Archangel Gabriel, a Church in honour of Saint Mary the Mother of God. And though they steadfastly preached the faith of Christ, the barbarian King with his people, hearing such new and unaccustomed things altogether refused to accept their preaching nor was he willing to depart from the traditions of his fathers: nevertheless, because (translated ). Almost the same words are found in the Cottonian MS., where various prophecies of Merlin and others are collected together. they had come from afar, he acceded to their petition to be allowed to inhabit a certain island surrounded by woods and marshes. That portion in truth was xii hides and they built there (as has been premised ) a chapel out of twisted wattles in the year XXXI from the Lord's Passion," Thus Johns Tinmuth in his "History of the British Saints " and John Capgrave, who copied from him, in his " New Legends of England, " but prudently with this preface: "That which is set out below, I have selected at Glaston from the books of that Monastery which as to whether they savour of truth I leave to the judgment of the reader." And, towards the end this comment is appended: "I, however, do not take upon myself the authority of discussing or determining what is doubtful in the foregoing or in some which follow: but as a simple relator I communicate without distinction those things which, as an assiduous searcher, I have with labour and difficulty been able to meet with in divers books and places, leaving the difficulties to the judgment of experts. ' Polydore Vergil, a man of greater sagacity, after dismissing the grosser fables of the monks, thus sets forth this history: s (translated ). Jo. de Tinmuth and Jo. Capgrave in the Life of S. Patrick. t "That Joseph who, on the testimony of the Evangelist Matthew, born in the city of Arimathea, had buried the body of Christ, whether by chance or design, came by the Will of God, with no small retinue into Britain where, as well he as his Companions when they preached concerning the Gospel and assiduously taught the doctrine of Christ, many were led by their means to the true faith and strengthened with its health -giving fruit, were baptized. These men, assuredly inspired by the Holy Spirit, when they accepted as a gift from the King a little piece of land for their habitation (nigh to the town of Wells, about 4,000 paces ), there they laid the first foundations of the new religion, where to -day is a magnificent sanctuary and a noble community of the monastic family of the Order of S. Benedict. "The name of the place is Glasconia. This constituted absolutely the first beginnings of the Christian faith in Britain which, later on, though nearly extinguished, King Lucius rekindledbeing sustained by the fountain of baptism — and piously augmented, as we shall hereafter relate. For Gildas is witness that the British received the Christian religion from the very beginning of the rise of the Gospel." Thus Polydore. And before him Richardus Lepidus Bartholinus: "Nor do I forget," says he, "that Joseph of Arimathea, when he was shamefully imprisoned by the Jews and so miraculously liberated by Almighty God, was nowhere seen again in Judea. For, as the writers of the annals shewed, he migrated into Britain; and there he both taught the worship of Christ and left many memorials of himself in the Vale of Avalon, which can there be seen.” Thomas Scrope, at one time Bishop of Dromore in Ireland, relates the same thing concerning the coming of Joseph, in the 7th Chapter of the book which he wrote concerning the antiquity of the Order of the Carmelites. And Thomas Harfeldius, in the "Summary of the Kings of England," where he says that "Faganus and Duvianus (or Deruvianus ) in the times of King Lucius found in the Isle of Avalon an ancient church built by the disciples of Christ, with ancient writings to the effect that after the holy Apostles had dispersed in order to preach, St. Philip coming into France sent twelve of his disciples into Britain of whom Joseph of Arimathea was the chief." And, in fact, there exists to this day a letter in the name of our Great Patrick composed by the * Lepid, epis. ad D. Robertum Wingfeld, edit. Lovan, an. 1517. monks of Glaston (that is the charter of the Blessed Patrick quoted above by Malmesbury ), in which concerning the origin of the church, which by the Anglo - Saxons is called EALDCIRC — that is, the old Church-in treating of it he is thus introduced: "The Brothers have produced to me the writings of Saints Phaganus and Deruvianus: in which it is recorded, how that twelve disciples of Saints Philip and James built the Old Church itself in honour of our foreordained advocate the Blessed Virgin Mary, by the direction of the Blessed Archangel Gabriel. And, moreover, that the Lord had divinely dedicated the same church in honour of His Mother; and how that three pagan kings gave these xii, xii portions of land for their support." "Twelve disciplesAnd then Malmesbury: of Saints Philip and James having come into Britain in the year of Our Lord's Incarnation LXIII, three kings, although pagans, conferred upon them xii portions of land: whence to this present the name xii hides has persisted." This he states in the "Book of the Antiquities of the Church of Glaston": where he carefully describes the boundaries of these xii hides, together with the particular places contained within their limits. Of the same things, also, mention is thus made in the Register Book of William I King of England, which is called "Domesday: " "The Church of Glastingebury has in its own holding (villa ) xii hides which have never paid tax." It is said, again, that a hide is such a portion of land, as will suffice to support a family (whence that which Bede in his Ecclesiastical History calls a family, his Saxon interpreter translates Hydelander ) or as is capable of being cultivated in the year by one plough; just as, first in Dunstan's charter granted in the year DCCCCLXIII, in which he concedes a portion of land "of seven ploughs * (aratrorum ), which in English is called seven hides ": then from Matthew Paris, Henry of Huntingdon, John of London, Thomas of Walsingham and others, our antiquarians take notice: That in truth these three pagan kings were Arviragus, Marius and Coillus, I find noted in the margin of the Malmesbury book, of which we have the MS. in the Library of the College of the Holy Trinity at Cambridge: which John Capgrave likewise acknowledges: though on this point he is not entirely consistent. For in the "Life of Patrick," confirming John Tinmuth and Harding in his "Chronicle,"b y (translated ). Domus Dei. in the Great Register of the Monastery of Glaston, which is called Secretum Domini, fol. 249b. z Ploughlands. a Guil. Lambard in 'Apxalovou; Jo. Selden, in Polyolb. Cant. II; Et Not. in Hengham, pag., 127, 128, Et. D. Hen. Spelman in Glossario, verb. Hida. he writes that these twelve hides were granted by Arviragus: but in the " Life of Joseph," by his two successors, Marius the son of Arviragus and Coillus the son of Marius; which kings, however, John Harding scarcely admits to have been pagans. He relates, indeed, that Arviragus was converted to the faith by Joseph of Arimathea and was purified at Holy Baptism: that Mariusª and Coillus were to some extent imbued with the Christian religion although they did not partake of that perfection which was meet. In the same way Richard Vitus of Basingstoke says that Arviragus was well affected towards the Christian religion: Coelus also, his grandson by his son Marius, was " instructed in the Christian religion for a short time while he lived, not, however, that he professed it publicly." From Juvenal, indeed, it appears that Arviragus became King of the Britons while Domitian was Emperor, since our Joseph is said to have died under Vespasian in the year LXXVI. Gildas Albanius, a disciple of Patrick, is said to have written a book concerning the victory of Aurelius Ambrosius: whom our Fox cites c Harding, Chron., cap. 48.d Harding, Chron., cap. 50. e Vit. Histor. Britann., lib. 4. f in cap. 15., infra, a nobis citando. as the author of the Acts of Joseph and his companions among the Glastonians. But neither he ever saw a book of that kind: nor was any credibility attached to it by Nicholas Sanders, here so confidently praising the authority of Gildas in his first book concerning schism: "Glasconia is a place in the western part of England, which not only by continuous tradition, but by the authority of the most ancient writers is believed to be that which Joseph of Arimathea, who buried Christ, being expelled from Judea by the persecution of the Jews, under the Emperor Nero and carried to Britain with many companions, obtained from Arviragus, King of the Britons, in which he might found a Sanctuary to the God of Heaven in the fiftieth year of Christ. For so Gildas the Briton, a Christian writer, who on account of his surpassing erudition was called The Wise, related nearly 1,100 years before our time and all the English Annals from that time confirm." John Capgrave, also, in his "Life of Joseph," (translated ). And another, earlier than this, in the margin of the MS. of Matthew Florilegi; in the Library of D. Jacob Waraeus, Melkinus (or more properly Mewynus ) who was before Merlin, among other events, in his book concerning the times of the British, says this: "The noble Decurion Joseph of Arimathea with his xi Companions gained eternal sleep in the Isle of Avalon: and lies in the southern angle of a bifurcated line of the Oratory of the Adorable Virgin. He has also with him two small silver and white vessels filled with the blood and sweat of the Great Prophet Jesus. And after much time before the Day of Judgment, his body will be discovered whole and unimpaired: and will be exposed to the view of the whole world. Then shall neither dew nor rain fail this most noble island for its inhabitants. to these adds another witness, Melkinus, who he says was before Merlin. His words are produced, which, transcribed from various originals, we here exhibit, although wholly unworthy to be read: "Avalon's island with avidity claiming the death of pagans more than all the world beside for the entombment of them all, honoured by chanting spheres of prophecy, and for alltime tocome adorned shall itbe by them that praise the Highest. "Abbadare ' mighty inSaphat, " noblest of pagans,with ahundred and four thousands there hath fallen on sleep. Amid these Joseph de Marmore (of Arimathea by name ) hath found perpetual sleep. And he lies on abifurcate line ( inlinea bifurcata ) *next the south corner ofan oratory fashioned (praeparatae ) ofwattles for the adoring of amighty Virgin, by the aforesaid k(translated ). Anote of some monk of Glaston prefixed tothe Book of Will.of Malmesbury de Antiq: Glaston. inMS. inLibrary of College of the Holy Trinity, Cambridge. And appended tothe Chronicle of Glaston in the Cottonian MS. Library. The Great Register of Glaston inthe possession ofD. Will.Howard. Capgrave in his Life of Joseph,etc. John of Glaston. Monk,etc. 1al. Albadan. m al. Masphati. nal Marmeria. Translator's Note: *Some interpret this phrase as: "In adivided linen garment,' but this seems toconflict with the passage infootnote i. 22 H.K.B. • al.praeparatis. sphere - betokened dwellers (habentibus) in that place, thirteen in all. "For Joseph hath with him in his sarcophagus two small silver and white vessels, filled with Blood and Sweat of the Prophet Jesus. When his sarcophagus shall be found entire, intact, in time to come, it shall be seen; and shall be open unto all the world. Thenceforth nor water nor the dew of heaven shall fail the dwellers in that ancient isle. "For a long while before the Day of Judgment in Josaphat open shall these things be and declared to living men." John Harding cites this Mevinus, the British Chronicler, in his versified Chronicle, for whom the name of Nenius appeared in the 48th Chapter: where from him he relates the beautiful story, how that Joseph delivered the Cross to King Arviragus for the insignia of the British race which, afterwards, was called the Georgian Cross, depicted on a silver shield. But I should abuse my leisure and the reader's patience were I to recount the very frivolous fictions which are referred to concerning Joseph in the scattered writings of this kind, now by Harding and Capgrave, now in the "Great Register of Glaston." P al. habitantibus. Jo. Glast. 9 Cap. 50 and 51. That which by no means must be overlooked is that in the General Councils of our Europeans, when a controversy arose touching the dignity of the Kingdom of Britain with the French and Spanish, the ambassadors of the English nation were wont continually to cite this tradition concerning Joseph. This question was deliberated first in the year 1409 in the Council of Pisa, next in the year 1417 in the Council of Constance of which is extracted: ("Nobilissima disceptatio super dignitate et magnitudine regnorum Britannici et Gallici, habita ab utriusque oratoribus et legatis in Concilio Constantiensi. ” Lovanii, anno M.DXVII. typis excusa). "The most celebrated dispute touching the dignity and rank of the kingdoms of Britain and Gaul, maintained by their ambassadors and legates in the Council of Constance. Louvain. Printed in the year 1517. " D. Robertus Wingfeldius, Knight, Ambassador of Henry VIII, King of England, to the Emperor Maximilian, caused this to be published from the recorded acts of the Council of Constance itself, which also we find in the two MSS. transcripts of that Council. r (translated ). Another of these is to be found in the Royal library; another (which formerly had been the property of Cardinal Peter Bembi) in the private one of D. Henry Wotton, v. cl. Here, indeed, when in the 30th session this question was moved "whether it accords with right and reason to put on an equality the kingdom of England and the kingdom of France in General Council ": on behalf of the authority of the English Church it was, among other things, alleged that "Immediately after the Passion of Christ, Joseph of Arimathea, a noble Decurion, who took down Christ from the Cross, with xii companions immediately proceeded to cultivate the Lord's vineyard, that is to say England, and converted the peoples to the faith. To whom the king assigned xii hides of land in the Diocese of Bath for their maintenance: who, so it is written, are buried in the Monastery of Glaston in the diocese of Bath, concerning which xii hides aforementioned the said Monastery is distinguished as having been endowed from ancient times. But the kingdom of France received the faith of Christ in the time of Saint Dionysius and by his ministry." The same claim also was propounded in the Council of Siena in the year 1424 by Richard Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln and founder of Lincoln College, Oxford, when this controversy was renewed by the English against the Spanish, Scots and French before Martin V. s (translated ). Very nearly the same things may be read in the Book concerning the provinces of England, MS. in the Cottonian Library. But in the Council of Basle especially, in the year 1434, this contention boiled up between the Ambassadors of the King of England and Castile: where, with regard to the objections which had been raised against ours on this question by Alphonso Garcia de Sancta Maria, doctor of laws and Dean of the Churches of Compostella and Segovia, it seemed good to set forth and print them from the Cottonian papers. "The Ambassadors of the King of England," said he, "as well in the presence of your most reverend worships as in the sacred deputation said that they were to be preferred on account of their more ancient reception of the Christian faith. For they say how that that noble Decurion Joseph of Arimathea with others, in the year XV after the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, came into England and converted its greater part to the faith of Christ. And, afterwards, not a long time after the Passion of Christ, Pope Eleutherius converted the whole of the kingdom of England to the faith." To the first, namely that concerning Joseph, he answers: I. "By way of settling that claim, I entirely deny (said he) that Joseph came into England. He who asserts it should prove it (juxta l.Ei qui ff.de proba). Some history or authentic writing should be produced in evidence. II. "On the contrary probability. For though the onus of proof does not lie on him who denies (utl. actor. C.de proba ): yet sometimes the negative is proved by investigation, when it has chronological congruity (ut 1. optimam C. contrahentium et com. stipu. ). In this case, therefore, this negative can well be proved by contrary writings. For the contrary is contained in the Flowers of the Saints, under the Legend of James the Less. "Here it is also read that Titus entering into Jerusalem, saw that a certain wall was very thick, and ordered it to be pierced: and within they discovered a certain old man, who said he was Joseph of Arimathea, and that he had been imprisoned in that place by the Jews on account of his having buried Christ, and that even to that time he had been nourished on heavenly food. "Nevertheless, in the Gospel of Nicodemus it is said that Christ liberated him after his resurrection and conducted him into Arimathea. But it may be said that though released, when he ceased not to preach, he was imprisoned a second time by the Jews themselves. See as to this above. When, therefore, Joseph was imprisoned at such a time at Jerusalem it is impossible for him to have been in England, at so great a distance. III. "It may be said, that even though this t (translated ). Or in the Acts of Pilate in Gregory of Tours. histor., lib. 1, cap. 20. were true (which, nevertheless, was not) it does not follow that that whole dominion received the faith. IV. "It is still affirmed, moreover, granted that which is denied, the Spanish first received the faith, which is proved, because James suffered martyrdom in the life of Peter. For it is written of Herod, that he slew James with the sword, and had the intention to apprehend Peter, Chapter XII of the Acts. But it is well known that Peter suffered under Nero. Nero, moreover, was about the year of Our Lord 54 and Titus about the year 80. Now it is certain that if Joseph were in England, this was after he was liberated from prison by Titus, and thus after the 80th year from the Nativity of Our Lord: and James died many years before Nero, about the 40th year from the Lord's nativity. "And Spain received the faith from James, in his lifetime, or immediately on his burial; as above stated. Therefore Spain is the more ancient in the faith." Thus Alphonsus Garcias to the Fathers at the Council of Basle: wherein some things are wholly trivial, not a few exceedingly ridiculous. In regard to his first reply: the histories and ancient writings corroborating the mission of Joseph to the British, we have brought together above with as much diligence as we could, and have produced in evidence. To which we now add the declaration put forward in that Council by the Ambassadors and Legates of the King of England: “Certain it is that in England are to be found in the most ancient books and archives, principally in the archives of the notable Abbey of Glaston, in the diocese of Bath; that Joseph of Arimathea with twelve companions, either in consequence of the persecution of Herod, or of the Roman Governors of Judea, sailed to England. There he preached what he had seen and heard concerning Christ, and by his preaching converted many; and converting them he acquired for himself an infinite number of things collected by those he had converted to the faith; these acquisitions he afterwards left to a Church erected by his means to Christ (and this at the time that Peter preached the faith at Antioch ): which Church, erected by Joseph, has developed into a place of religion and of the dignity of an Abbey, and by means of a notable monastery the praise of Christ is preserved to the present time." We entirely deny that the contrary probability which he urges in the second place, is probable. Nor do we think that anyone to -day, if Thomas Dempster be excepted, " is so foolishly credulous u Apparat, ad histor. Scot, lib. 1, cap. 7, pag. 27; Vid. Melchiorem Inchofer, de veritate epistolae B. Mariae ad Messanenses, cap. 13, pag. 71, 72. as to regard as probable this very absurd fabrication concerning Joseph of Arimathea shut up in a wall; and concerning the author of the "Golden Legend", Jacobo de Voragine," from whose garden plots these fetid Flowers of the Saints are gathered, in Spain itself the opinion is expressed now and has been for a long time. past by Ludovicus Vives and Melchiore Cano that that man was brazen of speech and leaden of heart. As to the third point, that the whole of the realm of Britain did not receive the faith by the ministry of Joseph, it is true enough but it is not relevant to the issue. For neither do the Spanish themselves say that the whole kingdom of Spain was converted by James; nor is it established that whole kingdoms were made Christian by any one of the Apostles: and, moreover, the question at issue concerns the antiquity, not the universality, of the reception of the faith. As to the fourth and last point, this rests partly upon doubtful, and partly upon false, premises. Rodericus Ximensis, Archbishop of Toledo, accounted the preaching of James in Spain as doubtful, in the controversy which he had in the year 1215, in the Lateran Council with the Prefect of Compostella, concerning the w Jacob. Januens, in legenda S. Jacobi minoris. * Vives, de causis corrupt. artium. lib. 2. y Can. de locis Theolog. lib. 11., cap. 6. primacy. His words, published by Garsia Loaisa from the MS. book of the Toledo Library, are: "If he (Compostellanus ) brings forward the first promulgation of the Divine Word and the conversion of very many to the faith of Christ in Spain (accomplished by James ), let them who are acquainted with Holy Writ produce the evidence. I only know that the opportunity was given him of preaching in Spain: but, in the meantime, while sowing the Divine Word through Judea and Samaria, he was decapitated under Herod at Jerusalem and giving up the Ghost, rendered it unto his Lord. How, therefore, did he preach there where he had not been at all? or whom, pray, without preaching, did he convert to the Lord?” Nor on the other hand is it certain, however much Alphonsus may affirm it to be so, "That if Joseph was in England, it was after he had been liberated from prison by Titus, and so after the 80th year from the Lord's Nativity. For it is certain that Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus in the 70th year (not the 80th ) of the Christian era: in fact, that which is assumed as certain concerning Joseph of Arimathea being liberated by him is an idle tale of the most frivolous character. z Collect. Concil. Hispan, a Loaisa edit., pag. 291; et Concil. edit. Colon. an. 1618, tom. 2, part 2, pag. 317, 318. Vide Baron. annal., tom. 9., an. 816., sec. 49, 50, 51, 52, et bibliothec. Floriacens. Joannis Certainly William Eysengreineusª in his annals of the English relates that he "after the destruction of Jerusalem attached himself to the Apostles: and that, by agreement, he proceeded to Britain when he was now old, and preached Christ in the city of Wells." But in no English annals does he find that express circumstance as to time. The Glastonians, and the monk of Malmesbury in the second book of his Eulogy, refer the coming of Joseph to the year of Christ 63: which they propound as the fifteenth from the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin. The English Ambassadors, as we have said, claim in this Council of Basle that a Church had been erected by Joseph in Britain " at the time when Peter preached the faith in Antioch ": and in the Council of Constance, they maintained that "immediately after the Passion of Christ " he entered Britain and converted the people to the faith. Which well agrees both with the age of Joseph himself, who when the Lord was entering upon his Passion, had been an honoured senator among the Jews, and with those things which at the commencement we produced from a Eysengrein. cent. 1, part 6, distinct. 6. b Mar. cap. 15., ver. 43. evoxýμwv Bovλeuròs quod a vulgato interprete, nobilis decurio, redditur, de quo videndus commentarius B. Hieronymi in Matth., cap. 27., et Ludovici de Dieu V.C. in Marc., cap. 15. Et. H. Grotii, in Matth., cap. 27., ver. 57. Qui apud Plinium Secundum, lib. 10, epist. 113. Buleutae in Rescripto Trajani, epist. 114. decuriones appellantur. Gildas concerning the last days of Tiberias Cæsar. For John Harding does not deserve that any respect should be paid to him here: who pretends that Joseph for these forty -two years from the death of Christ, lived, not indeed in a wall, but detained in the prison of Caiaphas, without food or drink: that then he was liberated by Vespasian and brought over to Britain in the year of Christ 76 and that there he was commended to the king Arviragus and his wife Genissa (who is represented as being the daughter of the Emperor Claudius ). John Bale, sometime Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, writes that he departed this life in that same year. " In sainted old age (he says )ª Joseph at length in the midst of his disciples by the death of the body gained the sleep of peace, being buried in the solitude of Avalon in the year 76 from Christ's Incarnation and in the reign of Marius in Britain. Afterwards his body was translated to the College of the Monks of Glaston and enclosed in a casket of great price. Nor are there wanting (says he) those who from conjectures maintain that he composed a certain Epistle to the British churches." Which conjecture William Eysengreineus, that he might render it more probable, and that the epistle might not be regarded as written by one present to those present, pretends that he " had left the island and in order to keep his memory green, had written an Epistle to the British": here, too, with a quotation from the Annals of the English: in which, however, we find it nowhere stated that he had either left Britain or written any letter of the kind or had died and been buried elsewhere than at Glaston. There exists a very ancient register of Saints buried in England, written in the Saxon tongue, and in Latin, by Gotcelinus Bertinianus, a monk of Canterbury, published in the days of Archbishop Anselm: and another book concerning the relics preserved at the Monastery of Glaston, discovered in the times of Henry III, King of England. In neither, indeed, does any mention occur of Joseph. At length, in the year 1345, a license was procured from Edward III by John Blome of London on the pretext of a certain revelation made to him, to seek for the body of Joseph of Arimathea: which, as transcribed by me from the royal archives preserved in the Tower of London, I do not think it amiss to communicate to the reader: e Septoniæ enim sepultum fuisse (ea Dorsettensium Shaftesburia est) per errorem scriptum legitur in Jo. Caii historiae Cantabriq., lib. I, pag. 23, nam. Glasconiæ, ibidem, pag. 31. legitur. "The King to all to whom & c. Greeting. John Blome of London has petitioned us, that, whereas it has been divinely imposed upon him (as he asserts ), in order that the body of the noble decurion Joseph of Arimathea, which buried beneath the inclosure of the Monastery of Glaston rests in Christ, may be venerated and revealed in these times to the honour and edification of many, he may diligently seek until he find it. And because in certain ancient writings his body is said to be contained in the spot where it was buried. We, if it be so, being desirous of a memorial of him and of shewing all fitting honours to the venerable remains of him who shewed for our dying Redeemer such homage of piety and humanity in removing His body from the Cross and placing it in his own new tomb; and trusting to produce for ourselves and for our whole nation the greater favour: Concede and grant license (so far as in us lies ) to the same John to dig beneath the precincts of the said Monastery and that it be lawful for him to seek those precious remains according to the charge and revelation made to him in such places as he may think fit: Provided nevertheless that it can be done without detriment to our well beloved in Christ,the Abbot and Chapter of the said Monastery, and without damage totheir Church and dwellings and tothis end he should have the license and assent of the Abbot and Chapter themselves. In witness whereof, & c. At Westminster VIII day of June. Teste Rege. By the King Himself What was the outcome of this enquiry, I do not find: but by those who have seen the Monastery of Glaston it has been handed down, that a chapel was there dedicated to the name of Joseph, and also that a tomb was situated there inscribed with this epitaph: "I came to the Britons, after that I had buried Christ: I taught, I found rest." To which add also, if you please, the narrative of William Goode the Jesuit, who in the reign of Henry VIII was born at Glaston and was educated there as a boy: "There were in existence (he says ) at Glasconia inscribed tablets of brass to perpetuate his memory, chapels, crypts, crosses, arms, and the observance of the feast of S. Joseph for vi days at the Calends of August, as long as the monks enjoyed most securely the King's Charters: now all things have perished mingled with the ruins. But none of the monks ever knew the exact posi- * Edvard. Maihew, congregat. Anglican. ordinis Benedict. Tabul. 2., pag. 1118, 1119. tion of this holy sepulcre, or described it. They say that it was most carefully concealed, either there, or on a mount, which is in the vicinity of a pointed mountain, and the name of which is Hamden -hill: and that some day his body will be found, and that the whole world will flock thither because of the greatness and number of the miracles which will be wrought.' "And, among other things, I remember to have seen at Glasconia on a stone cross, which was overturned under Queen Elizabeth, a brass tablet on which was inscribed, that Joseph of Arimathea came to Britain in the thirtieth year after the Passion of Christ with eleven or twelve companions, and that he was allowed by King Arviragus to dwell at Glasconia which was then an island called Avalonia, as solitary and simple men: and that he brought with him two silver vases of no great size in which was some of the most holy blood and water which had flowed from the side of the dead Christ. Moreover this same cross was erected many years before to denote the length of the chapel constructed by the aforesaid St. Joseph of willow wattles in honour of the Blessed Virgin: to wit, with a straight line drawn from the middle of the Cross to the side of the Chapel that was afterwards built of squared stones: under which hvid. supr., pag. 31, et 37. was also once the Chapel of St. Joseph in a subterranean crypt. Moreover outside in the wall of this Chapel of the Blessed Virgin there were carved in stone in characters of great age these two words, JESUS, MARIA. And the ancient arms of the Monastery of Glasconia confirm this, which are as follows: A white shield on which longways is erected the shaft of a green and knotty cross and from side to side are stretched arms or branches of the cross similar to the shaft. Drops of blood are sprinkled all over the surface of the shield. On each side of the shaft and under the arms of the Cross is placed a gilded chalice. And these were always denominated the insignia of St. Joseph who was piously believed to have lived, and probably to have been buried there." That the aforesaid Joseph was buried there with his companions, I find thus recorded in the "Great Register of the Monks of Glaston:" "Here repose xii disciples: of whom the head and guardian was Joseph of Arimathea, who buried the Lord. Many from among the pagans converted by their means to the faith of Christ and baptized rest in the same spot, of whom on account of their multitude, there is no number." Concerning these pagans the author of the "Eulogy " in his second book says: "Sojourning here for a long time, and many flocking from the said kingdom to the spot having been converted to Christ by their means, at length they rested in peace. Moreover Joseph of Arimathea was buried in the same spot close to the aforesaid church of the Blessed Mary with two phials full of the bloody sweat of Christ, which he had brought with him from the Holy Land." Now, what was the condition of the place from that time to the times of King Lucius, William of Malmesbury tells us in these words: "So these renowned holy men ' thus dwelling in this same wilderness, after many fleeting years had run their course, were released from the prison house of the flesh: and the same place began to be the lair of wild beasts which before had been the habitation of Saints." i Guil. Malmesbur. de Antiquitat. Glaston, et eum secutus Johannes de Tinmuth, et Capgravius in Vita Patricii. THE END OF CHAPTER II The Stanhope Press Ltd., Rochester THE LIBRARY UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LOS ANGELES